---
layout: section
title: "Gifts not Objects"
chapter: "0"
section: "1"
subsection: "5"
indexterms: "Method, Indigenous Research;New Materialism;Relationality;Method, Speculative Research"
---

*The {#D-71}specimen</span> is a gift*. It was taken, and, in the context of this study, it was often taken without the record of {#D-13}consent</span> that would pass muster for an institutional review board (IRB). Thinking of the {#D-71}specimen</span> in this way shifts the relationship between researcher and the things they study, and it is indebted to the scholarship of Indigenous researchers who have spent decades trying to untangle the western academy’s extractive {#D-22}epistemics</span> (0.1.3; 4.1.3).

To consider the {#D-71}specimen</span> as a gift requires, first, an understanding of {#D-62}relationality</span>. {#D-62}Relationality</span> is not in the kind of {#D-70}social constructivist</span> approaches to {#D-22}epistemics</span> argued for by new materialists, which posits nonhuman agencies and perspectives, and reach for non-hierarchical philosophies. These practices are articulated in western contexts as methods to contradict and circumvent Cartesian, Hegelian, and Heideggerian philosophical assumptions, trying to imagine worlds without colonial, fascist, or capitalistic {#D-30}ideological</span> baggage (2.4.1; 2.4.2).[^fn1] Indigenous {#D-62}relationality</span> instead lies in a combined worldview and knowledge system which is common to many Indigenous traditions, especially tribes in North America from which many of my scholarly interlocutors hail. As I am a cis, heterosexual, white man, my understanding of this approach is both limited and biased, so I have chosen to borrow more heavily from the writing of Indigenous scholars to describe this approach themselves.

{#D-62}Relationality</span> refers to an array of interrelated {#D-22}epistemic</span>, {#D-45}ontological</span>, methodological and axiological frameworks shared by Indigenous peoples and researchers.[^fn2] {#D-62}Relationality</span> connotes the communal, familial, tribal, and environmental connections which enable rich, nuanced, and unique understandings of the world. I am indebted to Shawn Wilson’s book *Research is Ceremony* for my own understanding of this approach*.* In the book a research interlocutor and interviewee, Peter, articulates how {#D-62}relationality</span> is about connection: 

>It’s collective, it’s a group, it’s a community. And I think that’s the basis for relationality. That is, it’s built upon the interconnections, the interrelationships, and that binds the group . . . but it’s more than human relationships. And maybe the basis of that relationship among Indigenous people is the land. It’s our relationship to the land. There’s a spiritual connection to the land. So it’s all of those things.[^fn3]

This connection to land operates differently than in individualistic European ideologies. As Stan Wilson argues, Indigenous peoples “understand themselves as constituted by their relationships with all living things”, noting its distinction from other {#D-22}epistemic</span> and cultural frameworks tied to the Black diaspora, Eastern religion, and feminist thinking.[^fn4] Shawn Wilson, paraphrasing Stan, summarizes this concept: “Rather than viewing ourselves as being *in* relationship with other people or things, we *are* the relationships that we hold and are part of.”[^fn5] This is why the words {#D-22}epistemic</span>, {#D-45}ontological</span>, methodological and axiological are used in conjunction with one another when talking about Indigenous research. For these frameworks, beliefs, and practices, “[t]he *what* is always already a *why* and a *how* which is another way to say ‘obligation’”[^fn6]

Doing research from this framework is not about working on something, so much as it is generating a relationship with something and fostering all of the relationships that are bound to it. I do not research {#D-71}specimens</span> as {#D-63}objects</span>, I bring those lives, afterlives, and phenomena closer to me. My acknowledgement and sensitivity toward these connections makes me obligated to these actors. Shawn Wilson, and his interlocutors, articulate this as {#D-62}relational</span> accountability. As Wilson writes,

>gaining knowledge is more like being married to someone---you don’t own your spouse or children but you do share a special relationship. It is a relationship that you are accountable to. And therefore it becomes cultural appropriation when someone comes and uses that knowledge out of its context, out of the special relationships that went into forming it. You have to build a relationship with an idea or with knowledge, just like you have to with anything or anyone else.[^fn7]

Doing research brings us, scholars, into relationship with our {#D-63}research objects</span>: we cannot be separated from them, as they are bound to us in our attention to and respect toward our research goals. Often when writing this dissertation, when asked what I am working on, I respond with something like “I do work on the history of tuberculosis”, or “I look at the moments when people are turned into research objects in medicine.” From a {#D-62}relational</span> framework it would be better to articulate this statement as “I work *with* the history of tuberculosis, and I work *with* the people who were made into research objects.” Moreover, this notion of being bound to and responsible for one’s research foregrounds what Wilson and his interviewees and interlocutors describe as relational accountability. I cannot just do research on tuberculosis; instead, by doing research with the doctors and patients I have an ethical obligation to everyone who co-constitutes my research program. My attention brings with it an obligation to care for and care with these interlocutors, even those who were harming their {#D-70}subjects</span> in their research (2.4.3; 4.2.3).[^fn8]

The idea of the {#D-71}specimen{#end{} as a gift attends to the {#D-62}relations</span> and obligations I have as a researcher to the humans who were brought into the scientific record without their {#D-13}consent</span>, and who remain in that record against the wishes of their decedents and communities. Understanding their gift to me, drawing their lives closer to me, makes me obligated not to see these {#D-71}specimens</span> as {#D-63}research objects</span>, but as the afterlives of humans who deserve justice.

This turn from {#D-63}object</span> to {#D-62}relational</span> interlocutor is contradictory to the argument I made in the last section (0.1.4). In describing {#D-71}specimens</span> as {#D-63}objects</span>, my goal was to articulate how biomedical, scientific, and western {#D-22}epistemics</span> assume a certain relationship between researcher and what they study. I use the term {#D-63}object</span> as a helpful shorthand to describe this relationship, but my hope is to do away with some of the {#D-30}ideological</span>, {#D-22}epistemic</span>, and methodological violence which the objectification of human {#D-74}subjects</span> enables. I have said many times in this introduction that human {#D-71}specimens</span> were people once. This claim cannot operate within a framework of the {#D-63}research object</span>, because that framework assumes history, culture, and identity can be split from research materials.

In this way the goal of the dissertation is to do two things: First, it articulates a series of knowledge claims regarding the history of medicine, drawn as they are through media studies. These claims are made with the explicit intent to describe and detail the entanglement of colonialist, capitalist, and white supremacist {#D-30}ideologies</span> within medical knowledge work.[^fn9] I argue that the entire medical {#D-22}epistemic</span> apparatus is built upon a colonialist will to extract from the bodies of patients (0.1.3), and that will to extract is part and parcel of the broader medical system: the production of medical institutions (1.2.3; 1.2;5), the production of {#D-20}disciplinary</span> categories (1.3.4; 2.2.3), and the production of medical {#D-71}specimens</span> themselves (2.2.4; 2.3.1; 2.3.2). 

Second, through a process of self-reflective critique (0.2.2), I articulate a broader interrogation of the history of medicine and the humanist approaches to these {#D-30}ideological</span> systems. As Eve Tuck has argued researchers tend to do harm-based research, which assumes that social change is produced through the revealing of harms done to individuals or communities. For Tuck this view reduces how scholars look at communities, in looking for harm they portray these communities only as harmed, damaged, and in need of aid.[^fn10] I am less interested in the overt harm which has obviously been done in the history of medicine, because that observation has done little to address the systemic problems in medicine. Instead, I work {#D-501}speculatively</span>---a frame borrowed from Saidiya Hartman and Krista Thompson---to imagine what might change if research did not depend on extraction (0.2.2; 4.2.1).[^fn11]

As scholars, our obligation is to those with whom we research, and this demands that we do more than just theorize and report harms. The {#D-22}epistemic</span> systems in which we work are themselves a problem: they have done harm and continue to do harm to their research interlocutors; they continue to produce value for the benefit of colonial institutions that wield their cultural, economic, and {#D-22}epistemic</span> power to continue to harm othered communities; they maintain western, white supremacist, capitalist systems which largely benefit able-bodied, white, middle- and upper-class peoples.

This articulation extends and complicates what Harriet Washington has already convincingly argued. The medical system in the United States is one which produces two separate health apparatuses, {#D-74}subjects</span>, and outcomes. She writes, “the much bewailed racial health gap is not a gap, but a chasm wider and deeper than a mass grave. The gulf has riven our nation so dramatically that it appears as if we were considering the health profiles of people in two different countries---a medical *apartheid*.”[^fn12] This racist system compounds and exacerbates other modes of racial inequality, while at the same time benefitting the health of the white population.

Washington’s excoriation of America’s medical systems went hand in hand with another critique: of the history of medicine writ large. Throughout the twentieth century and before the history of medicine was usually told by doctors themselves; the medical libraries which held books that I used for this research were usually made from the donations of doctors who had enough disposable income to collect and preserve rare medical textbooks. The history of medicine has a long history of touting its own values, centralizing its own ‘great men’,[^fn13] and Washington’s monograph, alongside the development of public histories of medicine in the late twentieth century,[^fn14] showed how that history willfully ignored the harm practiced in the pursuit of {#D-6}biomedical</span> progressivism. This dissertation extends this critique to one which includes other disciplines---media studies (0.1.3), health humanities, digital humanities (4.1.2; 4.2.1), death studies (2.2.4)---all of which inform different parts of its project, into its meta-critique. So much of the western academic system is built on theft, and as scholars we are obligated to attend to this problem and seek to remedy it. 

[^fn1]: For non-hierarchical and non-Hegelian philosophy, see: Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix Guattari. *A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia*. Translated by Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987; Serres, Michel. *The Parasite*. Translated by Lawrence R. Schehr. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2007; Glissant, Édouard. *Poetics of Relation*. Translated by Betsy Wing. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1997.
	
	For new materialist and object oriented approaches to philosophy see: Bennett, Jane. *Vibrant Matter*. Duke University Press, 2010. <https://doi.org/10.1215/9780822391623>; Bennett, Jane. “Systems and Things: A Response to Graham Harmon and Timothy Morton.” *Source: New Literary History* 43, no. 2 (2012): 225--33; Harman, Graham. “Object-Oriented Ontology.” In *Palgrave Handbook of Posthumanism in Film and Television*, edited by MIcchael Hauskeller, Michael Carbonell, and Thomas D. Philbeck. London & New York: Palgrave MacMillan Limited, 2016; Latour, Bruno. “On Actor-Network Theory: A Few Clarifications Plus More Than a Few Complications.” *Soziale Welt* 47 (1996): 369--81.

[^fn2]: I use these four terms to speak to relate the way Shawn Wilson articulates Indigenous knowledge practices. As my own project revolves around questions of epistemology, methodology, and ethics, I will not be referencing the other valences which Indigenous viewpoints shift and structure knowledge.
	
	Further, Édouard Glissant’s work also posits a kind of relationally, which rhymes with, but does not entirely correspond to indigenous frameworks. His scholarship is indebted to Afro-Carribean practices and cultures, which are distinct from Indigenous cultures.
	
	Wilson, Shawn. *Research Is Ceremony: Indigenous Research Methods*. Halifax & Winnipeg: Fernwood Publishing, 2008.
	
	Glissant, Édouard. *Poetics of Relation*. Translated by Betsy Wing. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1997.

[^fn3]: Wilson, Shawn. *Research Is Ceremony: Indigenous Research Methods*. 80.

[^fn4]: Wilson, Stan. “Self-as-Relationship in Indigenous Research.” *Canadian Journal of Native Education* 25, no. 2 (2001): 91--92.

[^fn5]: Wilson, Shawn. *Research Is Ceremony: Indigenous Research Methods*. 80.

[^fn6]: Liboiron, Max, Emily Simmonds, Edward Allen, Emily Wells, Jessica Melvin, Alex Zahara, Charles Mather, and All Our Teachers. “Doing Ethics with Cod.” In *Making & Doing: Activating STS through Knowledge Expression and Travel*, edited by Gary Lee Downey and Teun Zuiderent-Jerak, 137--53. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 2021. 144.

[^fn7]: Wilson, Shawn. *Research Is Ceremony: Indigenous Research Methods*. 114..

[^fn8]: Kim TallBear, following the publication of *Native American DNA*, navigates the ethical and epistemic problem of researching scientific practices.
	
	See: TallBear, Kim. “Standing With and Speaking as Faith: A Feminist-Indigenous Approach to Inquiry.” *Journal of Research Practice* 10, no. 2 (2014); TallBear, Kim. “Indigenous Bioscientists Constitute Knowledge Across Cultures of Expertise and Tradition: An Indigenous Standpoint Research Project.” In *Re:Mindings: Co-Constituting Indigenous, Academic, Artistic Knowledge*, 173--91. Uppsala: The Hugo Valentin Centre, Uppsala University, 2014.

[^fn9]: Fitzgerald, Des, and Felicity Callard. “Entangling the Medical Humanities.” In *The Edinbgurgh Companion to the Critical Medical Humanities*, edited by Anne Whitehead and Angela Woods, 35--49. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2016.

[^fn10]: Tuck, Eve. “Suspending Damage: A Letter to Communities.” *Harvard Educational Review* 79, no. 3 (2009): 409--27.

[^fn11]: Hartman, Saidiya. “Venus in Two Acts.” *Small Axe* 12, no. 2 (2008): 1--14; Thompson, Krista. “Art, Fiction, History.” *Perspectives*, Forthcoming 2017. Krista Thompson’s argument was articulated in a French journal, but I came across it in a English draft shared in a seminar. See: Lafont, Anne, Mark Ledbury, Krista Thompson, Pierre Wat, and Olivier Weller. “L’histoire de l’art à l’aune de La Fiction. Pour Une Extension Du Domaine de La Recherche.” *Perspectives* 1 (2017): 31--46.

[^fn12]: Washington, Harriet A. 2006. *Medical Apartheid: The Dark History of Medical Experimentation on Black Americans from Colonial Times to the Present*. New York: Harlem Moon & Broadway Books. 20

[^fn13]: Burnham, John C. “Garrison Lecture: How the Concept of Profession Evolved with the Work of Historians in Medicine.” *Bulletin of the History of Medicine* 70, no. 1 (1996): 1--24.

[^fn14]: An excellent example of a public history of tuberculosis is Linda Bryder’s monograph on British sanataria. Bryder, Linda. *Below the Magic Mountain: A Social History of Tuberculosis in Twentieth-Century Britain*. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988.