Title: Dissonly  
Author:

# <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/1_1_3}}">1.1.3</a> Seeing Hygiene, Sanatoria, and Doctors at Work

indexterms:

This chapter emerged from some simple, open questions which I began asking while creating the image dataset (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/X_1_3}}">X.1.3</a>): Why were there so many buildings photographed with no people in the frame, and why was there such an emphasis on architecture in the medical literature? What is happening with clean and dirty spaces? And where are the doctors in these books? These three questions relate to the main case studies that are examined in this chapter. In addition to these guiding questions, I also chose the three examples---sanitaria (1.2.0), hygiene (1.3.0), and doctors at work (1.4.0)---because they help me articulate the kinds of cultural practices which are most closely related to the case studies in the next chapter (2.0.0): they help me relay the capitalistic, ableist, and classist practices which proliferated around tuberculosis.

More than this, I look to these examples to give some historical context in more detail than I was unable to address in the introduction (1.0.0). These three case studies help me touch on trends that follow in the study and treatment in the decades following Robert Koch’s *Die Ätiologie der Tuberculose* in 1882 (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/2_1_1}}">2.1.1</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/2_1_2}}">2.1.2</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/2_1_3}}">2.1.3</a>). At the same time doctors were studying tuberculosis, they were building sanatoria, they were engaged in <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" title="Discourse refers to a scholarly conversation which occurs in a field of knowledge production. I use it in a Foucauldian sense, to convey the agreed upon modes and objects of discussion which are taken for granted in a community or scholarly field."><b>discourses</b></span> around public health, and, at least in America, they were involved in the gradual professionalization of the discipline at a national level.

These case studies show some of the implicit ways in which other aspects of tuberculosis’ <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" title="Visual culture refers to an interdisciplinary field that looks at the social construction of vision."><b>visual culture</b></span> ware framed, enacted, and reproduced. They also make explicit some of the practices which were sublimated in the actual <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" title="Specimen refers to any naturally occurring phenomenon that has been extracted from its original context and placed within a knowledge framework to understand and describe that phenomenon."><b>specimens</b></span> themselves. Starting with the sanatorium (1.2.0), moving to hygiene (1.3.0), and ending with the depictions of doctors (1.4.0), I will interlink the discipline’s surprising capitalistic investments, its penchant for <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" title="Pathologizing refers to a practice that links certain people, communities, or  differences (like neurodivergence or ability) as being abnormal from the assumed human anatomical standard."><b>pathologizing</b></span> othered peoples, and its promoting of its own laborers. 