---
layout: section
title: "Social Engineering"
chapter: "1"
section: "3"
subsection: "5"
indexterms: "Hygiene;Public Health;Necropolitics;Biopolitics;Eugenics"
---

The sanatorium and hygienic interventions discussed in this section and the previous one were not isolated (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/1_2_4">1.2.4</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/1_2_5">1.2.5</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/1_3_4">1.3.4</a>); medical professionals were also active participants in social engineering <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Discourse refers to a scholarly conversation which occurs in a field of knowledge production. I use it in a Foucauldian sense, to convey the agreed upon modes and objects of discussion which are taken for granted in a community or scholarly field."><b>discourses</b></span>. Tuberculosis was not a singular object which could be stopped in the body of a single patient; it was instead an invasive body that reproduced, manifested in different hosts, and presented a threat to a broader social fabric (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/2_3_2">2.3.2</a>). Seeded in these arguments is a notion of the body politic, which views the health of a community in broad strokes and engineers solutions to address the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subject</b></span> in aggregate. These arguments articulate a pernicious notion of disease by imagining it as foreign aggressor, which if not properly handled could and would invade the bodies of the ruling class. The control of disease was displaced onto the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subject</b></span> themsleves. These patients were blamed for becoming ill, and then blamed for making others sick.

This can be seen most obviously in a report published by the state of Virginia’s tuberculosis commission in 1915. They write, 

>The careful consumptive, who has been taught not to spread his germs, and who wishes to save other people from his fate, is not dangerous, but on the contrary, is a valuable aid in teaching the important facts relating to tuberculosis. On the other hand, the wilfully [sic] ignorant and criminally careless consumptives spread their disease widely and are more dangerous than mad dogs. In the interest of public welfare, we recommend legislation which will effectually restrain the criminally ignorant and criminally careless consumptives.[^fn1]

Personal responsibility became a way to dodge blame for the more pernicious, systemic issues at play; doctors seemed unable to imagine how disease was related to class, environment, and health.[^fn2] Instead, it was the untrained, uneducated <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subject</b></span> who was to blame for their own disease, and then it was the willful refusal of that <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subject</b></span> to be made docile that led to the spread of the disease.

Virginia’s sanatorium, and the rhetoric which supported its creation, corresponded to broader governmental and juridical shifts around this same period. Germ theory and the rise of public health brought with it the surveilling gaze of various public actors (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/1_3_4">1.3.4</a>) and larger scale maneuvers to combat contagious disease. This project often normalized western, white familial and cultural practices by depicting them as clean and safe. As Nayan Shah argues, that public health as it operated on newly established class norms, measured and maintained

>a new way of thinking about persons and their lives in the environment and in society. . . . Steadfast regulation of the body, conduct, and living environment became an increasingly crucial practice in guarding against the infiltration of disease. Voluntary associations and local government in the nineteenth century promoted hygienic care and sanitary management as essential to the modern project of ensuring human longevity, maintaining health, and managing the vitality of the population. Nineteenth-century bourgeois economic classes particularly valued the health benefits of self-care and contrasted their enlightened conduct and consciousness with the legions of the working poor and traditional agriculturalists. Their models of proper conduct employed new categories of normal and deviant, which were dramatically defined and invigorated by punitive race and class differences.[^fn3]

Systems of public health often leveraged judgemental, individualist modes of control and regulation. If the patient could not conform to the regiments of the charity sanatorium, they were either asked to leave or would leave themselves (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/1_3_4">1.3.4</a>).[^fn4] If patients used provided charity in a way that was unexpected or seemed otherwise ungrateful, they were chastised. The gaze which is produced in this context is a kind of projection: an imagined pollutant in the form of an uncontrolled body must be <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Discipline is used here in the Foucauldian sense. It is a pun that links forced discipline with the idea of a discipline of knowledge. Disciplining is a process where certain phenomena are made understandable through demarcation and definition in an academic field."><b>disciplined</b></span> in particular ways to protect the broader public.[^fn5] 

There is a slippage here regarding the docile <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use aesthetics to describe how representational practices overlap with taste arguments, and how representation is coded with a specific meaning for audiences in the middle and upper class."><b>subject</b></span> and the modes of resistance that are beyond the scope of the current project.[^fn6] The <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Discourse refers to a scholarly conversation which occurs in a field of knowledge production. I use it in a Foucauldian sense, to convey the agreed upon modes and objects of discussion which are taken for granted in a community or scholarly field."><b>discourses</b></span> that surround hygienic thinking implicitly leverage a <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Eugenics refers to a way of thinking that thinks that human society can bettered by selective reproduction. A deeply racist concept, eugenicists forwarded the procreation of white subjects while sterilizing, denying healthcare to, and outwardly killing populations thought to be of a danger to the social order."><b>eugenicist</b></span> ideology; the people who were blamed for their sickness and for spreading the disease were not the wealthy white subjects who could escape for an idyllic <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The rest cure was an approach to tuberculosis where patients were encouraged to do as little as possible and rest to recover their energy. It was regularly practiced along side the open air cure."><b>rest cure</b></span>. Those who were denied care were implicitly blamed for their own deaths, and equally blamed for the deaths they caused by ignoring the guidelines of doctors (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/1_3_4">1.3.4</a>). The creation of a docile <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subject</b></span>, a hygienic <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subject</b></span>, a healthy <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subject</b></span>, meant the construction of a counter-<span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subject</b></span> which could be vilified, and through that vilification allowed to die.[^fn7] 

This denial of care for tuberculosis patients is a covert <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Eugenics refers to a way of thinking that thinks that human society can bettered by selective reproduction. A deeply racist concept, eugenicists forwarded the procreation of white subjects while sterilizing, denying healthcare to, and outwardly killing populations thought to be of a danger to the social order."><b>eugenicist</b></span> <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Necropolitics refers to the implicit and structural means by which certain political actors are made to die."><b>necropolitics</b></span>: the unhygienic <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subject</b></span> can be allowed to die becaus they endanger the larger white society. I frame it in this way to negotiate Achille Mbembe's notion of <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Necropolitics refers to the implicit and structural means by which certain political actors are made to die."><b>necropolitics</b></span>---a theoretical framework that examines how undesired populations are made to die through structural negligence (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/2_2_4">2.2.4</a>)---and link it to the overtly biopolitical framing of <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Eugenics refers to a way of thinking that thinks that human society can bettered by selective reproduction. A deeply racist concept, eugenicists forwarded the procreation of white subjects while sterilizing, denying healthcare to, and outwardly killing populations thought to be of a danger to the social order."><b>eugenics</b></span>. <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Biopolitics refers to  juridical systems which define political power through birth, and the disciplinary systems that define what life is and how life operates."><b>Biopolitics</b></span>, as derived from Michel Foucault's work, stresses the ways the biological body became a political actor in modern societies.[^fn8]  <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Eugenics refers to a way of thinking that thinks that human society can bettered by selective reproduction. A deeply racist concept, eugenicists forwarded the procreation of white subjects while sterilizing, denying healthcare to, and outwardly killing populations thought to be of a danger to the social order."><b>Eugenics</b></span> as a scientific method born out of evolution is an exemplary example of <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Biopolitics refers to  juridical systems which define political power through birth, and the disciplinary systems that define what life is and how life operates."><b>biopolitical</b></span> control. Coined by Francis Galton from the Greek work *eugenes*, or "well-born", <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Eugenics refers to a way of thinking that thinks that human society can bettered by selective reproduction. A deeply racist concept, eugenicists forwarded the procreation of white subjects while sterilizing, denying healthcare to, and outwardly killing populations thought to be of a danger to the social order."><b>eugenics</b></span> responded to a series of Gregor Mendell-influenced studies in the ways traits were passed in human reproduction. Harriet Washington gives a succinct summary:

>Galton first formulated the desirability of using selective procreation to refine the human race while conquering social dysfunction. This goal was widely embraced on both scientific and popular levels by the 1930s, not only in the United States, but also abroad, and eugenic yardsticks were applied to not only populations but to individuals. Eugenicists proposed that society use medical information about disease and trait inheritance to end social ills by encouraging the birth of children with good, healthy, and beautiful traits.[^fn9]

<span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Eugenics refers to a way of thinking that thinks that human society can bettered by selective reproduction. A deeply racist concept, eugenicists forwarded the procreation of white subjects while sterilizing, denying healthcare to, and outwardly killing populations thought to be of a danger to the social order."><b>Eugenicists</b></span> viewed non-white peoples as being genetically inferior, owing to higher rates of disease like syphilis and tuberculosis, and saw the procreation of supposedly inferior <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subjects</b></span> as detrimental to the body politic.[^fn10] The forced sterilization campaigns, born from <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Eugenics refers to a way of thinking that thinks that human society can bettered by selective reproduction. A deeply racist concept, eugenicists forwarded the procreation of white subjects while sterilizing, denying healthcare to, and outwardly killing populations thought to be of a danger to the social order."><b>eugenicist</b></span> frameworks of human society, were the overt practice of a <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Biopolitics refers to  juridical systems which define political power through birth, and the disciplinary systems that define what life is and how life operates."><b>biopolitical</b></span> operation.[^fn11] The <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Necropolitics refers to the implicit and structural means by which certain political actors are made to die."><b>necropolitical</b></span> valence of these practices plays out in the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use aesthetics to describe how representational practices overlap with taste arguments, and how representation is coded with a specific meaning for audiences in the middle and upper class."><b>aesthetics</b></span> around who is deemed a good patient, and who is denied care because they do not fit that <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use aesthetics to describe how representational practices overlap with taste arguments, and how representation is coded with a specific meaning for audiences in the middle and upper class."><b>aesthetic</b></span> ideal.[^fn12]

Important for tuberculosis in the period of this study, was that the undercurrent of the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Discourse refers to a scholarly conversation which occurs in a field of knowledge production. I use it in a Foucauldian sense, to convey the agreed upon modes and objects of discussion which are taken for granted in a community or scholarly field."><b>discourses</b></span> around the disease were centered around the protection of certain populations, be they working laborers or the white ruling class. Returning to Virginia’s 1915 report, this logic can seen explicitly. The authors write,

>Since the greatest number of deaths and the greatest number of living cases occur among the negro race, since the relations between the two races are so intimate that a communicable disease affecting the negro must in a grave measure affect the white, since there is not a bed maintained by the State at present for a negro consumptive except in the State Asylum and Penitentiary, we would respectfully urge, for both humanitarian and economic reasons, that a sum of not less than $40,000 be appropriated for the immediate construction of a State sanatorium for the negro consumptive.[^fn13]

Hygiene and public health, as they are constructed in this report, are used to protect a *specific* race of <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subjects</b></span> separate from the Black patients they sought to institutionalize. In the example images shown in the preceding sections (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/1_3_1">1.3.1</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/1_3_2">1.3.2</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/1_3_4">1.3.4</a>), the hygienic gaze was one that expressed anxiety over the supposedly unwashed nonwhite, lower-class <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subject</b></span> that endangered the lives of the hygienic upperclass by their very proximity. Establishing sickness as a moral failure was a means to give an excuse to why the lower class may be allowed to die.[^fn14] Designating who is clean and unclean, healthy and unhealthy works into an imagined idealization of the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b> subject[^fn15]</b></span> but there is a secondary engineering at play: the moralization of how one is allowed to live or die. <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Necropolitics refers to the implicit and structural means by which certain political actors are made to die."><b>Necropower</b></span>, as Mbembe writes, functions as such: ”the new technologies of destruction are less concerned with inscribing bodies within disciplinary apparatuses than with inscribing them, when the time comes, within the order of the maximal economy now represented by the ‘massacre.’”[^fn16]

The <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use aesthetics to describe how representational practices overlap with taste arguments, and how representation is coded with a specific meaning for audiences in the middle and upper class."><b>aesthetics</b></span> of hygiene, and the hygienic gaze articulated in this section, proliferates a deeply <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Eugenics refers to a way of thinking that thinks that human society can bettered by selective reproduction. A deeply racist concept, eugenicists forwarded the procreation of white subjects while sterilizing, denying healthcare to, and outwardly killing populations thought to be of a danger to the social order."><b>eugenicist</b></span> idea: some patients should be left to die because they are, in the parlance of racist and classist rhetoric, ‘uncivilized’ and thus a threat to the broader social order. 

<div class="style-divider">
 	<div class="line"></div>
</div>

[^fn1]: State of Virginia. *Report of the Tuberculosis Commission of the State of Virginia, 1915*. 1915.

[^fn2]: Bryder, Linda. *Below the Magic Mountain: A Social History of Tuberculosis in Twentieth-Century Britain*. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988.

[^fn3]: Shah, Nayan. *Contagious Divides* : *Epidemics and Race in San Francisco’s Chinatown*. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001. 4.

[^fn4]: Bates, Barbara. *Bargaining for Life: A Social History of Tuberculosis, 1876-1938*. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992.

[^fn5]: Foucault, Michel. *Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison*. New York: Vintage Books, 1995.

[^fn6]: I am thinking in regards to the socially acceptability of masking over the course of the Covid-19 pandemic and afterwards. The proper procedures to mitigate the spread of the disease slipped and shifted. Partly this was because of misunderstandings and miscommunications by national health organizations, and partly this was due to the politicization of the disease and masking.

[^fn7]: Again, the Covid-19 pandemic has so many rhymes with the current study because the very subjects I am writing about in that pandemic were the ones violently refusing to mask, get vaccines, or social distance for the life of their peers.
	
	This was implicitly eugenicist, because these practices threatened the lives of people who would fall outside the abled and white norm established for biomedical practice.

[^fn8]: Foucault's thinking is linked closely with notions of French citizenship being tied to *jus sanguinis*--or "right of blood" or familial citizenship.

[^fn9]: Washington, Harriet A. *Medical Apartheid: The Dark History of Medical Experimentation on Black Americans from Colonial Times to the Present*. New York: Harlem Moon & Broadway Books, 2006. 190-192.

[^fn10]: This is best exemplified in the white supremacist practices levied by the Nazis in World War II.

[^fn11]: Washington, Harriet A. *Medical Apartheid: The Dark History of Medical Experimentation on Black Americans from Colonial Times to the Present*. New York: Harlem Moon & Broadway Books, 2006. 190-192. 189-215.

[^fn12]: While different in what constitutes a "good" subject, the ways tuberculosis remains a factor in excluding immigrants from entry into the United States, also has an aesthetics. That one is associated with the ability to see, through clinical vision, the manifetation of tuberculous symptoms in an x-ray of the lungs.
	
	Abel, Emily K. *Tuberculosis & the Politics of Exclusion: A History of Public Health & Migration to Los Angeles*. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2007.

[^fn13]: State of Virginia. *Report of the Tuberculosis Commission of the State of Virginia, 1915*. 1915.

[^fn14]: As the Covid-19 pandemic haunts this section, I wonder if I can square this logic a bit, because the most vitriolic and pernicious anti-mask and anti-vax rhetorics seem to bloom from eugenicist logics employed by the Trump administration. Its early spread in the United States was tied to urban centers with largely black populations, and its attatchment to anti-Asian hate (dubbed by president Trump as the “China virus”) points to a race-based eugenics that runs in parallel to narratives of the disease. These narratives seem to say, “it will only kill the inferior (non-white) stock”.
	
	Perhaps, too, my handwringing here is concerned with the extrapolation of what is a historical argument (about tuberculosis) onto a different historical moment (regarding Covid-19).

[^fn15]: This is important for Michel Foucault and the scholars who have been influenced by his ideas regarding discourse.

[^fn16]: Achille Mbembe. “Exit from Democracy,” in Necropolitics  trans. Steven Corcoran. (Durham & London: Duke University Press, 2019), 22.