---
layout: section
title: "Opacity in the History of Medicine"
chapter: "4"
section: "2"
subsection: "4"
indexterms: "Anatomy, Parisian Method;Opacity;Refusal;Librarianship, Medical;Archives, Medical"
---

I have foregrounded this chapter with the theoretical formulations which have informed the design of the OOPP’s features. I did this partly because so much of this dissertation is about the value of <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Specimen refers to any naturally occurring phenomenon that has been extracted from its original context and placed within a knowledge framework to understand and describe that phenomenon."><b>specimens</b></span> in biomedical research (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/0_1_4">0.1.4</a>), and the rights of historical <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>research subjects</b></span> (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_1_3">4.1.3</a>). I wanted to demarcate my ideas before talking directly about the image <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Opacity is a rights-based philosophical framework that assumes humans have a right to not be known in knowledge systems."><b>opacity</b></span> function on the platform. What I need to make clear, however, is that the OOPP is responding to a very specific problem in the history of medicine, and medical librarianship/archival practice: the materials produced before the codification of <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use the phrase 'consent' to refer to the idea of informed consent: that a research subject needs to be aware of what will happen to them in a research project, and that they have the ability to say 'no' at any point during the research program."><b>informed consent</b></span> were regularly made from people who did not want their bodies or remains used for research (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/0_1_5">0.1.5</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/2_1_3">2.1.3</a>).[^fn1]

As I described in the introduction, modern medicine was defined by posthumous theft: the best example of this is in the practice of grave robbing that corresponded with the adoption of the Parisian anatomical method (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/0_1_3">0.1.3</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/0_1_4">0.1.4</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/2_1_4">2.1.4</a>).[^fn2] Medical science depends on the bodies of their <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use the term research object to refer to materials that have been divorced from the subject of their origin. Object, as I use it, carefully considers how human patients are denied their humanity through transformations that deem them as objects."><b>research subjects</b></span>, and there are explicit and implicit value structures which are associated with <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Specimen refers to any naturally occurring phenomenon that has been extracted from its original context and placed within a knowledge framework to understand and describe that phenomenon."><b>specimens</b></span>. The value of the cadaver in medical research needs more critical examination, because once that <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use the term research object to refer to materials that have been divorced from the subject of their origin. Object, as I use it, carefully considers how human patients are denied their humanity through transformations that deem them as objects."><b>object</b></span> is imbued with <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Epistemics is a philosophical term referring to the study of knowledge. I use it to talk about the entwined practices of scientific culture, its arguments, and its methodologies."><b>epistemic</b></span> value, then it cannot easily be removed from academic contexts. The commodified corpse,[^fn3] the value of the patient’s body in this system, and the material, social, and <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Epistemics is a philosophical term referring to the study of knowledge. I use it to talk about the entwined practices of scientific culture, its arguments, and its methodologies."><b>epistemic</b></span> value of <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Specimen refers to any naturally occurring phenomenon that has been extracted from its original context and placed within a knowledge framework to understand and describe that phenomenon."><b>specimens</b></span>, are things that if lost will produce a loss for the organizations which own them (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/0_1_4">0.1.4</a>).

More important than the corpse as commodity is the ways this framework becomes entwined in the corpse’s supposed <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Epistemics is a philosophical term referring to the study of knowledge. I use it to talk about the entwined practices of scientific culture, its arguments, and its methodologies."><b>epistemic</b></span> utility. It would be shameful to sell these remains,[^fn4] but it is entirely acceptable to continue to use these materials to further research---to publish papers, write monographs, create museum displays and so on. This work produced value, and continues to produce value, for knowledge institutions, which all depends on the primary referent needed for the argument: the person from which the specimen, organ, image, or data point was originally extracted (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/0_1_4">0.1.4</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/2_3_1">2.3.1</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/5_1_2">5.1.2</a>).

To explain what I mean, I want to turn to an example illustrated by Megan Rosenbloom. Rosenbloom’s work is especially influential for this project, as her engagement with the often awful history of medicine is both critical and caring. She summarizes the issue described above succinctly, when describing a book challenge levied at USC’s Norris Medical Library. The challenge, brought against Édouard Pernkoft’s *Topographische Anatomie des Menschen* (also known as *Pernkopf’s Atlas*) raised an issue with the book’s original anatomical material. This challenge was centered around an issue of establishing <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use the phrase 'consent' to refer to the idea of informed consent: that a research subject needs to be aware of what will happen to them in a research project, and that they have the ability to say 'no' at any point during the research program."><b>consent</b></span>: Pernkoft made the atlas as a doctor in Nazi Germany, and the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>research subjects</b></span> whose bodies were used for the illustrations may have been victims of the Nazi regime and may have been anatomized without <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use the phrase 'consent' to refer to the idea of informed consent: that a research subject needs to be aware of what will happen to them in a research project, and that they have the ability to say 'no' at any point during the research program."><b>consent</b></span>. Rosenbloom and her colleagues decided to keep the book, adding a detailed description to the book’s digital catalog entry.

This practice is, in many senses, completely correct, especially considering *Pernkoft’s Atlas*’ lack of specific provenance and the ways the book could be used as a teaching tool to describe the pernicious ways fascism harms and continues to harm <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>human subjects</b></span> it deems as other. The problem is that, while it addresses so many concerns, it maintains a <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Relationality, as I use it, is indebted to Indigenous knowledge systems. Relation refers to the ways researchers become connected to and obligated to the people, ideas, and non-human entities which they study."><b>relation</b></span> between knowledge worker and exploited medical patient where the knowledge worker produces new knowledge from the body of the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subject</b></span> (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/0_1_5">0.1.5</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/2_1_4">2.1.4</a>). Rosenbloom’s response corresponds with a will to produce new knowledge from the same <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subjects</b></span> whose rights were ignored in order to include them in medical research. Earlier on in the book, Rosenbloom makes a convincing plea to the value of her research, writing,

>To learn about the people whose bodies make up these books, we must rely on the stories that accompany the objects through the decades, allowing for the generational game of telephone that plays out as stories change to suit the times in which they are told, or disappear altogether. There is no way to change how these people were treated in their deaths, but I can restore some respect to their humanity by uncovering their stories, separating the myths from the facts, and exploring the contexts in which such treatment of the dead could be remotely acceptable.[^fn5]

The production of knowledge becomes a liberatory practice, which repairs the historical record in such a way as to better know that past. Increasing the visibility of the history, while productive in its own right, further denies the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>research subject</b></span>’s right to <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Opacity is a rights-based philosophical framework that assumes humans have a right to not be known in knowledge systems."><b>opacity</b></span> (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_1_3">4.1.3</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_2_3">4.2.3</a>), while further entrenching the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Discipline is used here in the Foucauldian sense. It is a pun that links forced discipline with the idea of a discipline of knowledge. Disciplining is a process where certain phenomena are made understandable through demarcation and definition in an academic field."><b>disciplinary</b></span> and institutional value of the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use the term research object to refer to materials that have been divorced from the subject of their origin. Object, as I use it, carefully considers how human patients are denied their humanity through transformations that deem them as objects."><b>objects</b></span> which have been examined. My challenge to Rosenbloom, and those who work in the medical libraries, archives, and museums, is to ask, at what point does the harm preserved, indexed, and reproduced in these collections outweigh the potential value produced by the maintenance of unethically produced material? My concern echoes the counterintuitive ways materials may be recovered under the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA), where the communities, whose objects, information, and literal bodies were stolen, have to articulate the value of those materials in court in order to request their return (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_1_4">4.1.4</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/5_1_4">5.1.4</a>).[^fn6]

While iconoclastic in framing, my interest is not in the utter dissolution and dispersal of biomedical materials in libraries, museums, and archives. One of the biggest gaps in this research project is the absence of community interlocutors. Rather than assuming institutional and <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Discipline is used here in the Foucauldian sense. It is a pun that links forced discipline with the idea of a discipline of knowledge. Disciplining is a process where certain phenomena are made understandable through demarcation and definition in an academic field."><b>disciplinary</b></span> value inherent in these materials, knowledge workers in the history of medicine should consult with and listen to the communities who were harmed in the production of medical knowledge. The final decision for the inclusion of any <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Specimen refers to any naturally occurring phenomenon that has been extracted from its original context and placed within a knowledge framework to understand and describe that phenomenon."><b>specimen</b></span>, book, or object in these collections should be decided in concert with these communities, where their <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Refusal refers to the moments, actions, and possibilities enabled by denying academic access to personal, cultural, or spiritual materials and knowledge."><b>refusal</b></span> overrides institutional incentives for the maintenance, inclusion, or preservation of stolen materials (5.2.3).

The absence of a community to work with for this project presents a difficult problem,[^fn7] and so I built the OOPP with twin goals in mind. First, reflecting on the anonymity of much of my materials,[^fn8] I wondered what would happen to my argument should I follow through on the erasure of the primary source. While I still use these images and texts, and thus fall into the same disciplinary and academic traps which I criticized above, my interest is in <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term speculative refers to a broader discussion in history in how to best address structural violence which produces gaps in the archive. Speculative history imagines what might have happened, or otherwise fill in the gap where these violences occurred."><b>speculatively</b></span> imagining how a history might be told should it be bound to the ethical standards for which I am calling (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_2_1">4.2.1</a>). Part of this makes me a hypocrite, to which I will admit, but my reasoning for this is intentional, if in the reverse of this method: to show how much of my argument actually depends on the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>research subjects</b></span> I examine. My suspicion is that the history of medicine might not be as poorly affected by the loss of some of these materials as suspected.[^fn9]

Second, the Opaque Online Publishing Platform (OOPP) was developed to show differing levels of <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Opacity is a rights-based philosophical framework that assumes humans have a right to not be known in knowledge systems."><b>opacity</b></span>. I wanted to perform a kind of scaled <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Opacity is a rights-based philosophical framework that assumes humans have a right to not be known in knowledge systems."><b>opacity</b></span>, which would show the limitations of our contemporary ethical standards. These protocols tend to prioritize the needs of the institution and the abstract possibility for new knowledge (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_1_3">4.1.3</a>); moreover, outside the scope of ethics, I hoped that the differing approaches to <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Opacity is a rights-based philosophical framework that assumes humans have a right to not be known in knowledge systems."><b>opacity</b></span> might be applicable for scholars working with sensitive subject matter, or subject matter that might require trigger warnings. The production of this platform meant that it could be shared, remixed, and made to continue reparative work, beyond the contradictions that limit my own intervention. More than a <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term speculative refers to a broader discussion in history in how to best address structural violence which produces gaps in the archive. Speculative history imagines what might have happened, or otherwise fill in the gap where these violences occurred."><b>speculative</b></span> imagination of an ethical approach to the history of medicine (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_2_1">4.2.1</a>), I wanted these tools and methods to be applicable for a range of scholars who want to present their work in ways that care for both the scholar’s <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>research subjects</b></span> and their readers (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_3_4">4.3.4</a>). 

In the next section, I will focus on the affordances of <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Opacity is a rights-based philosophical framework that assumes humans have a right to not be known in knowledge systems."><b>opacity</b></span>, and the code Kalani Craig and Sagar Prabhu wrote to make the platform function. This section will get more technical, looking at the code explicitly. For those curious about the more specific affordances of the Jekyll-based GitHub site, please view the associated appendix (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/X_2_2">X.2.2</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/X_2_3">X.2.3</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/X_2_4">X.2.4</a>).

<div class="style-divider">
 	<div class="line"></div>
</div>

[^fn1]: And in some contexts, <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use the phrase 'consent' to refer to the idea of informed consent: that a research subject needs to be aware of what will happen to them in a research project, and that they have the ability to say 'no' at any point during the research program."><b>informed consent</b></span> has been circumvented or ignored by medical researchers and communities in the period after its codification.

[^fn2]: Richardson, Ruth. *Death, Dissection and the Destitute*. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1987.

[^fn3]: Richardson, Ruth. *Death, Dissection and the Destitute*.

[^fn4]: This is an entirely different practice.
	
	See: Huffer, Damien, and Shawn Graham. *These Were People Once: The Online Trade in Human Remains, and Why It Matters*. New York & Oxford: Berghahn, 2023.

[^fn5]: Rosenbloom, Megan. *Dark Archives: A Librarian’s Investigation into the Science and History of Books Bound in Human Skin*. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2020. 32.

[^fn6]: Colwell, Chip. “Curating Secrets: Repatriation, Knowledge Flows, and Museum Power Structures.” *Current Anthropology* 56, no. 12 (2015): S263--75; Colwell, Chip. “Sketching Knowledge: Quandaries in the Mimetic Reproduction of Pueblo Ritual.” *American Ethnologist* 38, no. 3 (2011): 451--67.

[^fn7]: This is owing largely to the already outsized scale of the research, the limitations of working during the height of the pandemic, and my own shortcomings as a researcher.

[^fn8]: This was an anonymity that became commonplace in anatomical research due to its centuries as a practice operating with illegally stolen cadavers, and which I suspect slipped over discursively into other arenas of medicine

[^fn9]: Although, for the keenest readers, some of this might be because my skill in history is only passable at best. I have taken a wider scale look at the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Discourse refers to a scholarly conversation which occurs in a field of knowledge production. I use it in a Foucauldian sense, to convey the agreed upon modes and objects of discussion which are taken for granted in a community or scholarly field."><b>discourses</b></span> as part of some of my other methodological interests, and as such, I have not gone in to as close detail as I might if I were doing more specific case studies.
	
	There are further concerns, too, with the ways that data plays in this dissertation, as I should be concerned with the metadata associated with extractivist epistemics. Should this be completely erased? Should it only be in images that are associated with medical <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="The term research subject refers to a human person who has been ingested into a research program, and whose identity, personhood, and body have become the focus of a research program. I think of the subject in a Foucauldian sense: The 'subject' is a pun on the monarchal subject, someone who has no agency under the spectacular power of the sovereign. In this case it the subject lacks agency in relation to the researcher studying them."><b>subjects</b></span>?