---
layout: section
title: "Refusal"
chapter: "4"
section: "2"
subsection: "3"
indexterms: "Refusal;Ethics, Postcolonial;Theory, Indigenous;Native American Graves and Repatriation Act;Science, Anticolonial"
---

Apart from the features that stress legibility to a variety of audiences (4.2.2), the Opaque Online Publishing Platform (OOPP) was designed with a single key feature---an {#D-46}opacity</span> toggle, which gives users the ability to black out specific images and text based on an ethical framework of {#D-46}opacity</span> (4.1.3). I will discuss the code and approach to making this feature possible later in this chapter (4.3.2; 4.3.3; 4.4.4). For this section, I want to outline how the OOPP engages with {#D-30}refusal</span> through the {#D-46}opacity</span> functionality. 

As I discussed earlier in this chapter (4.1.3; 4.1.4; 4.2.1), this platform engages in a {#D-72}speculative</span> approach to imagine how the history of medicine may be told if historians, librarians, archivists, and other knowledge workers foregrounded a subject’s right to {#D-46}opacity</span> (4.1.3).The choice to black out, to consciously erase and then display the mark of that erasure, through the change of the text, shows how a practice of {#D-46}opacity</span> and {#D-30}refusal</span> changes the final work (4.3.4; 4.3.5). I use ‘{#D-30}refusal</span>’ here as a key term in understanding how the {#D-46}opacity</span> toggle is formulated, because it links with a conversation in Indigenous theory regarding the exclusion of {#D-86}subjects</span> in research. By the standards of {#D-80}informed consent</span> (0.1.4), {#D-30}refusal</span> is an action that may be performed by a single {#D-86}research subject</span> to not allow a researcher to collect their data or include them in a study after being told the scope and potential harms of the research project or after that study had begun. {#D-30}Refusal</span> can, and should, extend beyond this framework. Max Liboiron and the CLEAR lab’s guidelines for community peer review describes this idea:

>The term *refusal* in a research context refers to ethical and methodological considerations about how and whether findings should be shared with and within academia at all, as researchers often encounter information that might be intensely personal, fundamentally contextual, sacred, intended only for certain people, or needs to be earned. Offering refusal is part of ensuring research is accountable to its relations. In refusal . . . fish harvesters and villagers set the terms of how and whether research that impacts their communities should occur, be conducted, and circulate. Practicing refusal keeps community knowledge from being a Resource.[^fn1]

Liboiron and their colleagues frame western research practices as prescribed by a colonial land relation---an assumption that land can be owned, maintained, and exploited by human actors, and which maintain these relationships through violent, often genocidal, means.[^fn2] This relation foregrounds an understanding that western {#D-83}epistemics</span> sees the {#D-63}research object</span> as a kind of land---something that may be owned, demarcated, defined, understood, stolen, and sold---which is the ultimate decider in its value (0.1.4). As Eve Tuck and K. Wayne Yang articulate, “[t]o refuse settler sovereignty is to refuse the settler’s unquestioned right to know and to resist the agenda to expand the knowledge territory of the settler-colonial nation.”[^fn3]

In the case of {#D-6}biomedical</span> {#D-32}specimen</span>, the colonial relations in the extraction, use, and maintenance of a historical {#D-35}wet tissue sample</span>, or a photograph of an organ, is predicated on the assumed value that may be continually mined by researchers---by both medical scientists and medical historians---to produce arguments. This potential value, which is nested in the {#D-32}specimen</span>, usurps the rights of the historical {#D-86}subject</span>, as they are not covered by the legal protections of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) as well as the potential protections afforded by the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) (0.1.4).[^fn4] All of the {#D-32}specimens</span> used to articulate this dissertation fall outside of these protections, due to their age, their usage in a piece of scientific research, and their anonymity.

{#D-30}Refusal</span> is a necessary framework to repair this colonial {#D-83}epistemic</span> {#D-37}relationship</span>. Again, Liboiron writes, 

>When I’ve presented the methodology of community peer review to mostly white settler audiences, especially those that work with Indigenous groups, people are discursively on board, but questions tend to stray toward techniques of ensuring research is not refuted. That’s creepy . . . . Giving up the entitlement and perceived right to data is central---the central!---ethic of anticolonial sciences. You will lose things in anticolonial research that you automatically get as a researcher in colonial modes of research (regardless of your heritage).[^fn5]

For Liboiron the priority for anticolonial research is on the communities whom that research effects, not on the potential for knowledge that may be inferred from the extracted data, specimens, and arguments. Refusal prioritizes the rights of {#D-86}subjects</span> and their communities by centralizing their voices and concerns. For the OOPP, {#D-30}refusal</span> becomes a mode to reflect on, and {#D-72}speculatively</span> erase (4.2.1), {#D-21}discursive</span> materials that were produced as a result of colonialist extractivism in research. It operates on an ethical framework that prioritizes {#D-80}consent</span> in historical materials over their potential {#D-83}epistemic</span> value.

[^fn1]: Liboiron, Max. *Pollution Is Colonialism*. Durham & London: Duke University Press, 2021. 142.

[^fn2]: Ibid., 7-10.

[^fn3]: Tuck, Eve, and K. Wayne Yang. “Unbecoming Claims: Pedagogies of Refusal in Qualitative Research.” *Qualitative Inquiry* 20, no. 6 (2014): 812.

[^fn4]: The failures and successes of NAGPRA has its own literature. Important in my framing is the ways NAGPRA facilitates further extractive relationships between Indigenous communities, as well as the right to refuse the repatriation of artifacts which is afforded to institutions (4.1.4).
	
	Colwell, Chip. “Curating Secrets: Repatriation, Knowledge Flows, and Museum Power Structures.” *Current Anthropology* 56, no. 12 (2015): S263--75.

[^fn5]: Liboiron, Max. *Pollution Is Colonialism*. 142 footnote 96.