---
layout: section
title: "Designing Legibility"
chapter: "4"
section: "2"
subsection: "2"
indexterms: "Minimal Computing;Deleuze, Gilles;Guattari, Felix;Ethics, Postcolonial;Community Peer Review;Open Access Publishing"
---

Early proposals for the OOPP contained the same feature set: 1) the use of links to produce a non-linear document (0.2.3), 2) mouseover functionality for text so that it could include definitions for a multi-disciplinary audience (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/X_2_2">X.2.2</a>), and 3) two separate <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Opacity is a rights-based philosophical framework that assumes humans have a right to not be known in knowledge systems."><b>opacity</b></span> functions---one for text and one for images (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_3_2">4.3.2</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_3_3">4.3.3</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/X_2_1">X.2.1</a>). These proposals were written with my dissertation committee in mind, working from the simplest to the most complex features in respect to the rhetorical affordances of digital technologies. I wanted the committee to know that the main functionality was actually quite simple---a Jekyll-based platform for GitHub which Kalani Craig had already developed (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_1_1">4.1.1</a>; <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/X_2_3">X.2.3</a>)---and that the work done for the dissertation were for legibility and access. Following the minimal computing turn in DH---which argues for computationally simple, accessible platforms in an explicit move to make the field more open to resource light institutions and scholars[^fn1]---I wanted both the platform and the argument associated with it to be available to a broader audience, rather than only the hyper-technical cadre often associated with the field (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_1_2">4.1.2</a>).

This reflected the original interest in the digital dissertation: to find a way to navigate the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use the term interdisciplinary (as opposed to multidisciplinary) in this dissertation to convey how different methodologies and frameworks guide my research."><b>interdisciplinarity</b></span> of the project so that it was more accessible to potential readers. The non-linearity afforded by hyperlinks (0.2.3),[^fn2] the organizing structure to cite other sections when evoked, and the open-access affordances of a public GitHub page spoke to a desire to articulate my argument through multiple avenues of interaction. The born-digital dissertation also afforded open access for under resourced colleagues, as it would not be published within ProQuest’s paywalled collections.[^fn3]

The mouseover functionality became a bridge between this interest in accessibility, and a way to streamline the rhetorical argument. The dissertation was going to be non-linear, meaning there would need to be some way to define and describe important terms which readers might approach in a traditional introduction chapter (0.2.3). I wrote, in the proposal for the 2023 IDAH Summer Incubator, the dissertation 

>borrows from the fields of media studies, the digital humanities, postcolonial theory, the medical humanities, medical history, science and technology studies, death studies and others. I want my readers to be able to see how these fields enable generative scholarship when discussed in the same breath, and I do not want these discourses and arguments to be engaged in isolation, but instead in concert with one another.[^fn4]

One of the problems that I encountered in writing this dissertation was a need to discuss and frame each aspect of each <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Discipline is used here in the Foucauldian sense. It is a pun that links forced discipline with the idea of a discipline of knowledge. Disciplining is a process where certain phenomena are made understandable through demarcation and definition in an academic field."><b>discipline</b></span> in such a way as to show aptitude for relevant readers. Dissertations, as a genre, require some of this hand waving as a method to show the labor of years of research, as well as a way to fulfill somewhat nebulous learning goals implicit in the practice. To talk about any of the fields mentioned above in isolation, to <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Discipline is used here in the Foucauldian sense. It is a pun that links forced discipline with the idea of a discipline of knowledge. Disciplining is a process where certain phenomena are made understandable through demarcation and definition in an academic field."><b>discipline</b></span> them in the little boxes of their <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Discourse refers to a scholarly conversation which occurs in a field of knowledge production. I use it in a Foucauldian sense, to convey the agreed upon modes and objects of discussion which are taken for granted in a community or scholarly field."><b>discourse</b></span>,[^fn5] assumes that they can be sequestered into a singular conversation, and diminishes how they can be engaged in concert.[^fn6] <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Discourse refers to a scholarly conversation which occurs in a field of knowledge production. I use it in a Foucauldian sense, to convey the agreed upon modes and objects of discussion which are taken for granted in a community or scholarly field."><b>Discursive</b></span> fluidity at multiple scales---from the structure of the dissertation, to the articulation of each section, to the way I write my sentences---helps manage these concerns.

These interdisciplinary affordances are one of the reasons why DH’s “big tent” has been so appealing to many in the past decades (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_1_2">4.1.2</a>).[^fn7] Tara McPherson, who edited the interdisciplinary journal *Vectors* with Steve Anderson, presents a useful model for the potentials of an intermixed conversation, especially with aesthetic laborers and cultural scholars. She writes that multimodal scholarship argues

>that hands-on engagement with digital forms reorients the scholarly imagination, not because the tools are cool or new (even if they are) or because the audience for our work might be expanded (even if it is), but because scholars come to realize that they understand their arguments and their objects of study differently, even better, when they approach them through multiple modalities and emergent interconnected forms of literacy.[^fn8]

One concern, which implicitly weaves into my own approach to this <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use the term interdisciplinary (as opposed to multidisciplinary) in this dissertation to convey how different methodologies and frameworks guide my research."><b>interdisciplinarity</b></span>, is whether any of it is legible to <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Discourse refers to a scholarly conversation which occurs in a field of knowledge production. I use it in a Foucauldian sense, to convey the agreed upon modes and objects of discussion which are taken for granted in a community or scholarly field."><b>discourses</b></span> outside of media studies.[^fn9] This is certainly an issue for DH, given how quickly working with digital platforms moves into questions of technical aptitude (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_1_2">4.1.2</a>). Onboarding a scholar to the OOPP involves a few hours of introductions: how GitHub works, how to write in markdown (.md), where to place files, and why they are placed in those folders in the first place.[^fn10]

My approach is very much indebted to the messy productivity of <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Rhizome is a Deleuzian concept that seeks to create a non-heirarchical structure for understanding the world. (Rhizome, as it is used by Deleuze, is not the same as the formation found in nature.)"><b>rhizomatic</b></span> methods; the disciplinary intermingling I engage with intentionally echoes the Deleuzian[^fn11] construct of the plateau---which Brian Massumi summarizes:

>Each “plateau” is an orchestration of crashing bricks extracted from a variety of disciplinary edifices. They carry traces of their former emplacement, which give them a spin defining the arc of their vector. The vectors are meant to converge at a volatile juncture, but one that is sustained, as an open equilibrium of moving parts each with its own trajectory.[^fn12]

<span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use the term interdisciplinary (as opposed to multidisciplinary) in this dissertation to convey how different methodologies and frameworks guide my research."><b>Interdisciplinarity</b></span> is necessary to a radical critique of enclosed disciplines, and it proliferates in certain critical traditions. These approaches enable an additive relationally---“and . . . and . . .  and. . .”---which embrace things caught at the in-between; as Deleuze and Guattari write, “The middle is by no means an average; on the contrary it is where things pick up speed.”[^fn13]

The emphasis on clarity, from the structure of the dissertation, to the way I try to write; however, rejects the more pernicious pomposity in the stylistics of Deleuze and his fans.[^fn14] While the academic inscrutability of Deleuze and Guattari’s original work is done with intention, this style alienates readers who are not already trained in and hip to the employed modes of argument. <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Rhizome is a Deleuzian concept that seeks to create a non-heirarchical structure for understanding the world. (Rhizome, as it is used by Deleuze, is not the same as the formation found in nature.)"><b>Disciplinary</b></span> training, not unlike the kinds of training medical doctors were subject to in their schooling, is a mode of exclusion: it is a form of gatekeeping which defines who is qualified to do specific kinds of work, and who is qualified to be read in those fields (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_1_4">4.1.4</a>). If humanists are to be <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="I use the term interdisciplinary (as opposed to multidisciplinary) in this dissertation to convey how different methodologies and frameworks guide my research."><b>interdisciplinary</b></span>, then we first need to be willing to write in styles that are legible to the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Discourse refers to a scholarly conversation which occurs in a field of knowledge production. I use it in a Foucauldian sense, to convey the agreed upon modes and objects of discussion which are taken for granted in a community or scholarly field."><b>discourses</b></span> in which we work and the communities whom we hope to engage; this is not because those styles are better, but because we need to show respect to our interlocutors, colleagues, and collaborators. We need to give them space to read, reflect, and respond, building a generative and collaborative community in the process.

I bring this problem forward for two reasons. First, I want to be upfront about some of my own stylistic concerns, because they maintain the same kinds of structures which produce value in academic settings (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/0_1_4">0.1.4</a>). Science and technology studies (STS) scholars have long shown how academic arguments articulate a kind of fortification and entrenchment.[^fn15] I cannot be honest about my critiques of medicine without sharing the same skepticism to my home fields, and calling out when aesthetics are used to gatekeep.[^fn16]

Second, when I have examined the work of scholars who are interested in research ethics, their research is intentionally plain spoken. This rhetorical position comes from their intentional inclusion of non-academic, often Indigenous, perspectives in their research programs. Kim TallBear and Max Liboiron articulate complex, critical scholarship in a bevy of communities both academic and not. Their communal interlocutors---especially for Liboiron, who practices community peer review[^fn17]---are not academics, and are not trained in the kinds of reading practices which academic writing assumes, but their voices, and their potential <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Refusal refers to the moments, actions, and possibilities enabled by denying academic access to personal, cultural, or spiritual materials and knowledge."><b>refusal</b></span> of Liboiron and the CLEAR Lab’s research (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_2_3">4.2.3</a>), foregrounds an anticolonial methodology.[^fn18] Implicit in this work is a need to be upfront and honest with communal colleagues, who may not be trained in the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Discipline is used here in the Foucauldian sense. It is a pun that links forced discipline with the idea of a discipline of knowledge. Disciplining is a process where certain phenomena are made understandable through demarcation and definition in an academic field."><b>disciplines</b></span> in which Liboiron or TallBear work, but whose input and discussion is vital.

This dissertation is committed to being open: it is published on an open access platform, and it follows the guidelines of the minimal computing approach to DH.[^fn19] Implicit in this openness, and the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Refusal refers to the moments, actions, and possibilities enabled by denying academic access to personal, cultural, or spiritual materials and knowledge."><b>refusal</b></span> of capitalistic forms of academic publishing and technological buildup, is an access beyond academic spheres. DH’s embrace of blogs, Twitter (now X), and other open platforms was also an embrace of how public conversations could strengthen the field’s work.[^fn20] If this is to be successful, though, it needs to be met with approaches that lower the bar to entry for scholars who are not in our unique fields. My attention to transparency[^fn21] in these regards is done with the hope to onboard more than the few scholars who are contractually obligated to read my writing, because those different perspectives deserve to be included in the conversation. It is respectful to write in ways that include rather than exclude (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/0_1_5">0.1.5</a>). This framework of legibility helps to contrast with the main technological or <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Epistemics is a philosophical term referring to the study of knowledge. I use it to talk about the entwined practices of scientific culture, its arguments, and its methodologies."><b>epistemic</b></span> intervention of the OOPP, the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Opacity is a rights-based philosophical framework that assumes humans have a right to not be known in knowledge systems."><b>opacity</b></span> functions from which it gets its name.

<div class="style-divider">
 	<div class="line"></div>
</div>

[^fn1]: Risam, Roopika, and Alex Gil. “Introduction: The Questions of Minimal Computing.” *Digital Humanities Quarterly* 16, no. 2 (2022). <http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/16/2/000646/000646.html>.

[^fn2]: This is not a new idea, and has been circulating in the digital humanities for more than a decade.
	
	Barnet, Belinda, and Darren Tofts. “Too Dimensional: Literary and Technical Images of Potentiality in the History of Hypertext.” In *A Companion to Digital Literary Studies*, edited by Ray Siemens and Susan Schreibman, 283--300. Malden: Wiley Blackwell, 2008.

[^fn3]: The digital humanities (DH), itself, has a long history of promoting open access in its journals and publications.
	
	My own desire is drawn especially on the minimal computing turn in DH, as it looks to open access as a means to level the access to digital projects.
	
	Risam, Roopika, and Alex Gil. “Introduction: The Questions of Minimal Computing.”

[^fn4]: Purcell, Sean. “The Tuberculosis Specimen Dissertation Platform Proposal,” March 2023. 1-2.

[^fn5]: Foucault, Michel. *Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison*. New York: Vintage Books, 1995.

[^fn6]: This argument echoes a recent turn in the health humanities to do away with bounded thinking.in relation to human health and culture. This approach is especially indebted to Karen Barad’s <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="New materialism is an approach that examines how non-human agents--animals, plants, non-living objects--exert and influence the diegetic world."><b>new materialist</b></span> scholarship.
	
	Fitzgerald, Des, and Felicity Callard. “Entangling the Medical Humanities.” In *The Edinbgurgh Companion to the Critical Medical Humanities*, edited by Anne Whitehead and Angela Woods, 35--49. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2016.
	
	Barad, Karen. *Meeting the Universe Halfway:  Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and Meaning*. Durham & London: Duke University Press, 2007.

[^fn7]: Svensson, Patrik. “Beyond the Big Tent.” In *Debates in the Digital Humanities*, edited by Matthew K. Gold. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012.

[^fn8]: McPherson, Tara. 2009. “Introduction: Media Studies and the Digital Humanities.” *Cinema Journal* 48 (2): 121.

[^fn9]: That is assuming it is legible to media studies too.

[^fn10]: It took me months to get a better understanding, paired with consistent help from Kalani Craig, before I had a good enough idea about how the platform worked to add my own details.

[^fn11]: And Guattarian. He’s always in the footnotes.

[^fn12]: Massumi, Brian. “Translator’s Forward: Pleasures of Philosophy.” In *A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia*, by Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, translated by Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987. xiv.

[^fn13]: Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix Guattari. *A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia*. Translated by Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987.

[^fn14]: Deleuze has some additional problems, like his conception of desire.
	
	Tuck, Eve. “Breaking up with Deleuze: Desire and Valuing the Irreconcilable.” *International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education* 23, no. 5 (2010): 635--50.

[^fn15]: Latour, Bruno. “Drawing Things Together.” In *Representation in Scientific Practice*, edited by Michael Lynch and Steve Woolgar, 19--68. Cambridge & London: The MIT Press, 1990.
	
	Latour, Bruno, and Steve Woolgar. *Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts*. 2nd ed. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986.

[^fn16]: Moreover, it is worth remembering that inscrutable academic posturing was central to the way racial violence hid in plain sight in medical science (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_1_4">4.1.4</a>).
	
	Washington, Harriet A. *Medical Apartheid: The Dark History of Medical Experimentation on Black Americans from Colonial Times to the Present*. New York: Harlem Moon & Broadway Books, 2006.

[^fn17]: Liboiron, Max, Alex Zahara, and Ignace Schoot. “Community Peer Review: A Method to Bring Consent and Self-Determination into the Sciences.” *Preprints*, 2018.

[^fn18]: Liboiron, Max. *Pollution Is Colonialism*. Durham & London: Duke University Press, 2021. 138-45.

[^fn19]: Risam, Roopika, and Alex Gil. “Introduction: The Questions of Minimal Computing.” *Digital Humanities Quarterly* 16, no. 2 (2022). [http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/16/2/000646/000646.html](endnotes.xml).

[^fn20]: See the Tara McPherson quote above.

[^fn21]: I use this term to gesture toward the ways scholarship can be intentionally <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Opacity is a rights-based philosophical framework that assumes humans have a right to not be known in knowledge systems."><b>opaque</b></span>, and to relay that certain forms of academic writing are articulated in such a way as to not be open to most readers (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/dissertation/4_1_4">4.1.4</a>). <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Opacity is a rights-based philosophical framework that assumes humans have a right to not be known in knowledge systems."><b>Opacity</b></span>, in academic writing, is a norm, but which does not seem to have the same hand-wringing qualities associated with it as the <span data-tooltip aria-haspopup="true" class="has-tip" data-disable-hover="false" tabindex="1" data-title="Opacity is a rights-based philosophical framework that assumes humans have a right to not be known in knowledge systems."><b>opacity</b></span> of primary objects.