---
layout: section
title: "Protocol for Image Data Set"
chapter: "X"
section: "1"
subsection: "4"
indexterms: 
---

Below is the written protocol given to coders when developing the image dataset.

One of the main long-term tasks for the *Tuberculosis Specimen* project is the cataloguing of images from the primary {#cI-13}corpus{#end}. Each image in the entire collection of texts has been extracted as a single .pdf file imaging the page. 

What I am asking from you is to 1) create an Airtable entry for each image, 2) describe that image’s medium (photograph, illustration, graphic, x-ray) and 3) describe the contents in relation to the interests of the project.\* 

* There is one other column (“Flag”) which is not your responsibility. However, if there is an image that is particularly striking, please feel free to change the field to “yes”. 

 

1) Creating an Airtable entry for each image. 

Every document in the tuberculosis {#cI-13}corpus{#end} has been tagged with an identifier which describes its author, title, date, and any other important information about the text. It goes “[author]\_[Texttile]\_[Date]” For example for the entry Cobbett\_TheCausesofTuberculosisTo\_1917 the entry refers to an author---“Cobbett”---the book’s title--- “TheCausesofTuberculosisTo” which was abbreviated down from “The Causes of Tuberculosis: Together with Some Account of the Prevalence and Distribution of the Disease”---and the publishing year---”1917”. 

This identifier corresponds to the various versions of the document in the {#cI-13}corpus{#end}: the two original files---a pdf “Cobbett\_TheCausesofTuberculosisTo\_1917.pdf” and .txt file “Cobbett\_TheCausesofTuberculosisTo\_1917.txt”--- as well as the various extracted images and notes. Image files were extracted using a tool in Adobe Acrobat and are tagged with the page number from the pdf\*\*---”Cobbett\_TheCausesofTuberculosisTo\_1917 329.pdf”. Some folders also include a .txt or .rtf file---”Cobbett\_TheCausesofTuberculosisTo\_1917IMGNotes.txt”---these files are either placeholders in the case a text does not have any images, or refer to sensitive images in the text.\*\*\* 

\*\*This does not correspond to the actual page number, but that is not important at this time. 

\*\*\*Sensitive images refers to, usually, images showing children in vulnerable, sensitive, or exposed situations. They are not included in the .pdf files on the grounds that they are awful and need not be reproduced. 

To make an airtable entry for each image, first go to the “Images” tab in the Airtable document, and **make sure that it is not sorted by any columns** (for ease of copying and pasting, and because the automatic sort function can cause data to be overwritten).  

Next, navigate in the teams environment to the folder containing the images from a single source. (Team Purcell > Primary Document > [5 Images](https://indiana.sharepoint.com/:f:/r/sites/msteams_a6d276/Shared%20Documents/Team%20Purcell/Primary%20Documents/5%20Images?csf=1&web=1&e=DJdpdX) > [IDENTIFIER])) Some folders will have no images, and only have a .rtf or .txt file which reads “[filename]IMGNotes.filetype”. If you encounter this, move the entire folder into the [folder for texts with no images](https://indiana.sharepoint.com/:f:/r/sites/msteams_a6d276/Shared%20Documents/Team%20Purcell/Primary%20Documents/5%20Images?csf=1&web=1&e=DJdpdX) (Team Purcell > Primary Documents > [5 Images](https://indiana.sharepoint.com/:f:/r/sites/msteams_a6d276/Shared%20Documents/Team%20Purcell/Primary%20Documents/5%20Images?csf=1&web=1&e=DJdpdX) > [1 No Images](https://indiana.sharepoint.com/:f:/r/sites/msteams_a6d276/Shared%20Documents/Team%20Purcell/Primary%20Documents/5%20Images/1%20No%20Images?csf=1&web=1&e=CkYut4)). If there are only a few images, you can choose to enter the images manually, but in the case of texts with dozens or hundreds of images you can automate using the command line. 

To do this command line work, download the folder which you plan to work on. You will need to download it so that you can take advantage of the Apple command line. (We will have to address the workflow if you are using a PC or Linux machine). You will need to use the change directory function to navigate the command line. 

Some helpful notes:

If you download the folder, double check to see if it is zipped first. If it is, extract it onto the same folder in which you are working. 

The command “cd” changes the folder in which you are working. These correspond to the GUI interface in the finder. If you download it to the downloads folder, for example, you will have to navigate there. But it is relatively simple by entering “cd downloads”. You can see that you have successfully change your directory when it reads “[user information] [directory] %” in the command line (so for accessing downloads it reads for me, “seanpurcell@Seans-MBP-16 downloads %” ).

To navigate to the folder itself you will have to change directories to the folder which is holding it “cd downloads” or “cd documents” for example, and then to the folder itself “cd Cobbett\_TheCausesofTuberculosisTo\_1917”. Once you are in the specific folder, follow the following commands:    
  

1. Enter command “ls | pbcopy”
    * (This command will copy each file name in the directory to your clipboard) 
    * IF YOU ARE USING A PC, you can get this file names using the following prompt “dir /b >[identifier].txt”. This will generate a .txt file that you can copy from to get the file names. 
2. Paste into a blank Excel spreadsheet. (You can use the same document each time you copy and paste. No need for a new one each time you do this process.) 
3. In Excel use Data>Text to Columns. Use spaces and “.” as the delimiters. Separate the .pdf file. Delete .pdf column. 
4. Use the “Sort” function (Data > Sort) to sort column B into ascending order. (This will make it easier to quickly move through the numbers.) 
5. Copy columns A & B with identifier and page number 
6. Paste the newly generated identifiers into the airtable document in the “Document Name” column. (Be sure to paste this into the bottom cell, because it will generate new cells automatically). 

 

**Entering Data**  

Once the file and page numbers are input into Airtable, you can start entering data. 

Each .pdf file in the folder for a text will have a corresponding page number. For each individual .pdf file, do the following: 

1. Check to see how many images are in the image. Some will have only one image  while others will have multiple. 
2. If there are multiple images, duplicate the file for each unique image. 
3. For each duplicate, designate the images as different by adding a letter to the end of each entry in the page number column. 
4. For example, the page of \_TuberculosisATreatisebyAm\_1909 632 has six images, so they would be designated as “632a”, “632b”, “632c”, “632d”, “632e”, “632f” 
5. When describing these images, work from left to right, from top to bottom (like you would read it in English). 

1. For each image, you will need to enter data into the “Image Type” and “Genre Columns”. Please leave the “Flag” column blank. 
2. The “Image Type” column defines the medium by which the image was collected or produced. 
    * Photograph: This is any image that is produced with the use of a photograph. 
    * Illustration: This is a drawn, painted, printed, or otherwise non-photographic, but true to real life representation of an object.
    * Graphic: This is any drawn representation that is not a detailed reproduction of an object. (This can be a map, a comic-like drawing, or an architectural represention of a building. 
    * X-Ray: Anything that displays the inside of a human body through the use of an x-ray. 
3. The “Image Type” column can only have one entry. 
4. The “Genre” column can have multiple entries, and each definition refers to an aspect of what is imaged. 
    * Architectural: Refers to the main subject of the image as being the built environment, in a floor plan, a photograph of a building, or the layout of a space.
    * Pathological: Refers to the image being used to describe some aberrant or abnormal phenomenon in the body of the subject.
    * Portrait: Refers to the image having a defined subject (human or non-human) which is the main focus of the image. This can refer to traditional portraiture, group portraits, or portraits of specific pathological or anatomical phenomena.[^fn1] This is a broad category, but it is important to include because it shows the decisions to frame and define particular elements be they human or physiological phenomena.
    * Diagnostic: Refers to images that purport to assist in the diagnosis of a disease.
    * Equipment: Refers to images that display medical devices as their main subject.
    * Advertisement: Refers to an image that is used in advertising. 
    * Anatomical: Refers to the image being used to display ideal or representative organs or bodies. 
    * Group: Refers to an image that includes multiple human subjects.
    * Child: Refers to any image that includes at least one child in it.
    * Treatment: Refers to an image that displays any kind of treatment, from surgical to something like rest or outdoor treatment.
    * Microscopic: Refers to the reproduction of phenomena only observable with the use of a microscope.
    * Organ: Refers to an image that only shows a subject’s organ, and no other parts of their body. 
    * Hygiene: Refers to any image that displays the use of hygienic techniques (cleanliness, washing, sterilizing and so on) or which depicts human subjects in squalor. 
    * Exhibition: Refers to images that depict tuberculosis exhibitions in museums, fairs, and other gatherings. 
    * Sensitive: Refers to images that show children in treatment or as examples of anatomical or pathological phenomenon. (Most of these are already marked in the IMGNotes text files.) 
    * Map: Refers to an illustrated map of a location. 
    * Animal Specimen: Refers to specimens that were produced from animal remains.  
    * Professional: Refers to images that are used in a professional context. Almost all of these are portraits.
    * At Work: Refers to images that show clinical professionals in the process of their work. 
    * Other: Refers to images that do not fit within the established categories. 
5. A Helpful Note: Many times, you will have to use the description text supplied in the source to figure out the specifics. 
6. Enter the identifier into the “Monograph Source”, “Journals, Reports, and Meetings” or “Articles and Chapters” column. 
7. You can search the document identifier and it should autocomplete. (This can sometimes take a few seconds to load.) 
8. Each of these kinds of sources refers to a different kind of document, so if it is not locatable after the data loads, try entering it into a different column. 

[^fn1]: A note here: We ended up not using this last designation after about half of the corpus was coded.