---
layout: post
title: Specimen Studies Part Two- Capta
excerpt: This sample blog post explores community archiving and links to a few example community-archive sites
author: sagar-prabhu
pullquote: "Find out more about community archiving!"
---

<br>
I went back to Andreas Vesalius in the previous section (0.3.2) to help underline one of the main interventions in this dissertation: modern medical epistemics have an ethics problem, which is maintained in the ways the history of medicine is narrated by historians, and the ways those representations are understood (especially in the context of museums, archives, and published work). The first half of this issue has already been addressed by public historians of medicine. John C. Burnham described medical history’s iaotrocentric bias---more simply, the ways medical historians of the past have described progressivist medical knowledge production from the successes of a few great geniuses---and public historians like Linda Bryder have described the history of tuberculosis with care to think about the treatment of patients, and the implicit biases of medical practitioners. Linda Bryder argued that the connection between the working poor and higher rates of tuberculosis could have informed structural changes to improve the health of these subjects, but those researching the disease “showed themselves to be very much a product of the middle-class society from which they came, with [their] fixed assumptions about the poor.” A recurring theme in this dissertation is the way medical practitioners map their own beliefs onto the bodies of the sick, but in addition to this is how that mapping creates a terrain from which knowledge may be extracted from those same patients.

I use a cartographic metaphor to point toward a colonial spatial ideology---cures are discovered, certain practitioners are pioneers, tuberculosis must be conquered. These implicit ideas of extraction and control are linked to the ways patients’ bodies are seen as resources in medical research (0.2.3). The bodies are seen as repositories of data, which may (and must) be excavated for their potential epistemic use. Johanna Drucker writes,

Data pass themselves off as mere descriptions of a priori conditions. Rendering observation (the act of creating a statistical, empirical, or subjective account or image) as if it were the same as the phenomena observed collapses the critical distance between the phenomenal world and its interpretation, undoing the basis of interpretation on which humanistic knowledge production is based.

To respond to this falsely ahistorical and apolitical frame of data, Drucker frames the quantitative material drawn from natural sources as ‘capta’. Operating as a binary opposite of data,

Capta is ‘taken’ actively while data is assumed to be a ‘given’ able to be recorded and observed. From this distinction, a world of differences arises. Humanistic inquiry acknowledges the situated, partial, and constitutive character of knowledge production, the recognition that knowledge is constructed, taken, not simply given as a natural representation of pre-existing fact.

I see the specimen, like Koch’s illustrations (0.2.1) and the Phipps Institute’s brains in jars (0.3.1) as different forms of capta. These objects are taken, naturalized, and made to produce value for the scientists that extract them. In this process these objects are made to look objective, as if they just explain a natural phenomenon, but this representation is explicitly constructed because in the process of anonymization is a refusal of accountability. The creation of large scale data sets, like the hundreds of autopsies performed at the Henry Phipps Institute in the first decade of its operation, obfuscates the individual and produces a kind of dehumanized database. The specimen, from this framework, is always taken. It is always taken from someone. Objectivity helps disguise the social systems from which that extraction takes advantage, and obscure the violence implicit in medical epistemics. Objectivity helps see the Phipps Institute’s many brains in jars as an abhorrent, but common practice, deemed necessary in the process of normal medicine.

